
This is the repository for the code of examining the effects of methane mitigation on global temperatures. 


## Abstract from paper

Recent works in climate science emphasize the importance of  stewardship to maintain Earth in a safe operating space for supporting human life. Earth systems may fall into a undesirable system state if certain boundaries are crossed. If 1.5 $\degree$ C warming is exceeded, it may cause a cascade of effects, such as permafrost melt, Amazon forest dieback, and ice sheet collapse. The permafrost is a tipping element that is particularly vulnerable to warming in the near term and has substantial feedback into climate. Methane ( $CH_4$ ) is a short-lived greenhouse gas but has the global warming potential of 28.5 times that of carbon dioxide ( $CO_2$ ) over a 100 year time span.  Because permafrost thaw in the coming centuries is partly determined by the warming of the 21st century, rapid reductions in methane emissions early in the 21st century could have far reaching effects. We use a reduced complexity carbon cycle model and a permafrost feedback module to explore the possibility that accelerating reductions in methane emissions could help us avoid long-term warming by limiting permafrost melt.  We simulate 3 extended RCP emission scenarios (RCP 2.6, 4.5, and 6) through the year 2300 and impose methane mitigation strategies where we reduce \meth emissions by 1\%, 5\% or 10\% annually until the long-term scenario emission level is reached. We find that accelerated rates of methane mitigation will not sufficiently bend the global temperature anomaly to prevent or delay a permafrost feedback, nor do they result in a meaningful long term reduction in temperatures. We find that the magnitude of methane mitigation (i.e., long-term emission level) and not the rate of reduction, corresponds to long term temperature change. Therefore, policy and mitigation efforts should emphasize durable decreases in methane emissions over rapidity of implementation.


Full text: [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2950138524000019](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2950138524000019)
